CHAPTER 7

‘If there is hope,’ wrote Winston, ‘it lies in the proles.’

If there was hope, it MUST lie in the proles, because
only there in those swarming disregarded masses, 85 per
cent of the population of Oceania, could the force to de-
stroy the Party ever be generated. The Party could not be
overthrown from within. Its enemies, if it had any enemies,
had no way of coming together or even of identifying one
another. Even if the legendary Brotherhood existed, as just
possibly it might, it was inconceivable that its members
could ever assemble in larger numbers than twos and threes.
Rebellion meant a look in the eyes, an inﬂexion of the voice,
at the most, an occasional whispered word. But the proles,
if only they could somehow become conscious of their own
strength. would have no need to conspire. They needed only
to rise up and shake themselves like a horse shaking off ﬂies.
If they chose they could blow the Party to pieces tomorrow
morning. Surely sooner or later it must occur to them to do
it? And yet——!

He remembered how once he had been walking down
a crowded street when a tremendous shout of hundreds of
voices women’s voices—had burst from a side-street a little
way ahead. It was a great formidable cry of anger and de-
spair, a deep, loud ‘Oh-o-o-o-oh!’ that went humming on
like the reverberation of a bell. His heart had leapt. It’s start-

FREE EBOOKS AT PLANET uBooxcom 89The words of these songs were composed without any hu-
man intervention whatever on an instrument known as a
versiﬁcator. But the woman sang so tunefully as to turn the
dreadful rubbish into an almost pleasant sound. He could
hear the woman singing and the scrape of her shoes on the
ﬂagstones, and the cries of the children in the street, and
somewhere in the far distance a faint roar of traﬂic, and yet
the room seemed curiously silent, thanks to the absence of
a telescreen.

Folly, folly, folly! he thought again. It was inconceiv-
able that they could frequent this place for more than a few
weeks without being caught. But the temptation of having a
hiding-place that was truly their own, indoors and near at
hand, had been too much for both of them. For some time
after their visit to the church belfry it had been impossible
to arrange meetings. Working hours had been drastically
increased in anticipation of Hate Week. It was more than
a month distant, but the enormous, complex preparations
that it entailed were throwing extra work on to everybody.
Finally both of them managed to secure a free afternoon on
the same day. They had agreed to go back to the clearing
in the wood. On the evening beforehand they met brieﬂy
in the street. As usual, Winston hardly looked at Iulia as
they drifted towards one another in the crowd, but from
the short glance he gave her it seemed to him that she was
paler than usual.

‘It’s all off,’ she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to
speak. ‘Tomorrow, I mean.’

‘What?’

174 1984could walk three kilometres, measured by pacing the cell,
and his bowed shoulders were growing straighter. He at-
tempted more elaborate exercises, and was astonished and
humiliated to ﬁnd what things he could not do. He could
not move out of a walk, he could not hold his stool out at
arm’s length, he could not stand on one leg without falling
over. He squatted down on his heels, and found that with
agonizing pains in thigh and calf he could just lift himself
to a standing position. He lay ﬂat on his belly and tried to
lift his weight by his hands. It was hopeless, he could not
raise himself a centimetre. But after a few more days—a few
more mealtimes—even that feat was accomplished. A time
came when he could do it six times running. He began to
grow actually proud of his body, and to cherish an inter-
mittent belief that his face also was growing back to normal.
Only when he chanced to put his hand on his bald scalp did
he remember the seamed, ruined face that had looked back
at him out of the mirror.

His mind grew more active. He sat down on the plank
bed, his back against the wall and the slate on his knees,
and set to work deliberately at the task of re-educating him-
self.

He had capitulated, that was agreed. In reality, as he saw
now, he had been ready to capitulate long before he had
taken the decision. From the moment when he was inside
the Ministry of Love—and yes, even during those minutes
when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice
from the telescreen told them what to do—he had grasped
the frivolity, the shallowness of his attempt to set himself

348 1984