It showed respect, like. I didn’t agree with it, myself, but I
done it often enough. Had to, as you might say.’

‘And was it usual—I’m only quoting what I’ve read in his-
tory books—was it usual for these people and their servants
to push you off the pavement into the gutter?’

‘One of ‘em pushed me once,’ said the old man. ‘I recol-
lect it as if it was yesterday. It was Boat Race night—terribly
rowdy they used to get on Boat Race night—and I bumps
into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenue. Quite a gent,
‘e was—dress shirt, top ‘at, black overcoat. ‘E was kind of
zig-zagging across the pavement, and I bumps into ‘im acci-
dental-like. ‘E says, ‘Why can’t you look where you’re going?’
‘e says. I say, ‘Iu think you’ve bought the bleeding pavement?’
‘E says, ‘I’ll twist your bloody ‘ead off if you get fresh with
me.’ I says, ‘You’re drunk. I’ll give you in charge in ‘alf a
minute,’ I says. An’ if you’ll believe me, ‘e puts ‘is ‘and on my
chest and gives me a shove as pretty near sent me under the
wheels of a bus. Well, I was young in them days, and I was
going to ‘ave fetched ‘im one, only——’

A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston. The old
man’s memory was nothing but a rubbish-heap of details.
One could question him all day without getting any real
information. The party histories might still be true, after a
fashion: they might even be completely true. He made a last
attempt.

‘Perhaps I have not made myself clear,’ he said. ‘What I’m
trying to say is this. You have been alive a very long time;
you lived half your life before the Revolution. In 1925, for
instance, you were already grown up. Would you say from

116 1984garden walls sagging in all directions? And the bombed
sites where the plaster dust swirled in the air and the wil-
low-herb straggled over the heaps of rubble; and the places
where the bombs had cleared a larger patch and there had
sprung up sordid colonies of wooden dwellings like chick-
en-houses? But it was no use, he could not remember:
nothing remained of his childhood except a series of bright-
lit tableaux occurring against no background and mostly
unintelligible.

The Ministry of Truth—Minitrue, in Newspeak [New-
speak was the oﬂicial language of Oceania. For an account
of its structure and etymology see Appendix.]—was star-
tlingly different from any other object in sight. It was an
enormous pyramidal structure of glittering white con-
crete, soaring up, terrace after terrace, 300 metres into the
air. From where Winston stood it was just possible to read,
picked out on its white face in elegant lettering, the three
slogans of the Party:

WAR IS PEACE
FREEDOM IS SLAVERY
IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH

The Ministry of Truth contained, it was said, three
thousand rooms above ground level, and corresponding
ramiﬁcations below. Scattered about London there were
just three other buildings of similar appearance and size.
So completely did they dwarf the surrounding architec-
ture that from the roof of Victory Mansions you could see

6 1984CHAPTER 2

He was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, ex-
cept that it was higher off the ground and that he was
ﬁxed down in some way so that he could not move. Light
that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his face.
O’Brien was standing at his side, looking down at him in-
tently. At the other side of him stood a man in a white coat,
holding a hypodermic syringe.

Even after his eyes were open he took in his surround-
ings only gradually. He had the impression of swimming up
into this room from some quite different world, a sort of un-
derwater world far beneath it. How long he had been down
there he did not know. Since the moment when they arrest-
ed him he had not seen darkness or daylight. Besides, his
memories were not continuous. There had been times when
consciousness, even the sort of consciousness that one has
in sleep, had stopped dead and started again after a blank
interval. But whether the intervals were of days or weeks or
only seconds, there was no way of knowing.

With that ﬁrst blow on the elbow the nightmare had
started. Later he was to realize that all that then happened
was merely a preliminary, a routine interrogation to which
nearly all prisoners were subjected. There was a long range
of crimes—espionage, sabotage, and the like—to which ev-
eryone had to confess as a matter of course. The confession

FREE EBOOKS AT PLANET uBooxcom 303